#  QnA SwiftUI

## 1. When and where to call an API in SwiftUI when a view appears?

One should use *task(priority:_:)* or *task(id:priority:_:)* for calling any asynchronous operations when view appears.
The advantage of using these is that if the view dissapears or is removed by SwiftUI then SwiftUI will cancel the task
automatically.

*task(priority:_:)* or *task(id:priority:_:)* are recommended ways for performing asynchronous operations and preferred
over *onAppear(perform:)*

## How to specify a launch screen in a pure SwiftUI App?
When one creates a new project using Xcode selecting SwiftUI as UI framework, then the boilerplate code generated by Xcode
doesn't contains the old LaunchScreen.xib used to provide a launch screen for app.
So in order to provide the launch screen one has option of using UILaunchScreen in Info.plist. UILaunchScreen is a dictionary
which can contain key value pair determining what to use for launch screen. Available options at present are :

1. UIColorName
2. UIImageName
3. UIImageRespectsSafeAreaInsets


## Can we store an object conforming to ObservableObject protocol in a State property?
YES, it is possible to declare a State property for an object which conforms to ObservableObject protocol. However one
important point to note in this regards is that Published properties update will not lead to view update, view will only
update if the State property changes, which can change only if the reference itself is changed to some other object. Only
way for view to get updated when Published property changes is to use StateObject or ObservedObject. 
